(MAINT) Draft WOP blog post (#58)
FlagrantGarden/site: content/posts/wop.md

web pages).

A non-exhaustive list of things you can do in a digital format that you can't do in the physical
formats[^2]:

- flexible display settings, like:
  - changing the size, color, and spacing of text and other elements
  - automatically adjusting layout based on the viewer's context (viewport size, light/dark theme
    preferences, etc)
  - switching to a different font (e.g. to a more readable font for folks with dyslexia)
- embedding additional media like audio and video
- nearly on-demand updating

Web formats add even more functionality:

- interactive elements generally, such as:
  - clickable buttons to do something like create generate a prompt, show a random item, or roll on
    a table
  - expandable/hidable content
  - filtering/sorting tables and lists
  - integrations with other services, like discord or RSS feeds
  - modals (pop-over content) to do things like export characters or adventure ideas
  - widgets to present information in a transformable/inspectable way
- Downloadable content
- Cross reference _between_ texts

### Reference Texts Aren't Teaching Texts

> My day job is technical writing. People in games often talk about technical writing but most of the
> people talking don't appear to have a technical writing background.

Author: ```suggestion
My day job is technical writing. People in games often talk about technical writing. Most of the
people talking don't appear to have a technical writing background.
```

I've [talked before][3f-talk] about a [threefold model][3f-site] of documentation which breaks down
into conceptual, narrative, and reference documents. Of those three, narrative documents are _most
frequently_ teaching texts. They have a specific set of learning goals for a specific audience. Some

> conceptual documentation are also teaching texts, covering a particular domain (or subdomain) in
> detail.

Author: ```suggestion
conceptual documents are also teaching texts, covering a particular domain (or subdomain) in detail.
```

An even better model is [Daniele Procida][Procida]'s four-kinds taxonomy, which distinguishes
between learning-oriented tutorials, goal-oriented how-to guides, understanding-oriented
discussions, and information-oriented reference material.

Notice that under neither model are reference texts the same thing as teaching texts. Referencing

> and learning are different activities and the structure and content of your text should be specific
> to the activity it's for.

Author: ```suggestion
and learning are different activities. The structure and content of your text should be specific
to its purpose.
```

   an editor take a pass on the text and, when you're happy with things, you send it to print and
   call it done.
1. You're working on a book without illustrations. You write a draft of your outline then start
   writing your book, editing and reworking your outline and each chapter as you go. You have your
   developmental editor take a pass on each chapter as soon as you think that section is done. When
   your text is complete, your editor starts a copy editing pass. Once you're text-complete, you
   move onto layout, doing a rough blocking for the project, copying your text in without styling it
   extensively. Next you do a broad styling pass to see how things look and if you need to add
   references, appendices, or other changes. Then you standardize everything and finally go through
   and verify everything before your editor takes a final line edit pass. Sure that you've made no
   mistakes, you send it to print and call it done.

The first approach is broadly incremental, the second iterative. All projects tend to be some
combination of iterative and incremental---there are some tasks blocked by others and everyone goes

> back and updates things at some point---but projects _tend_ to be more one or the other.

Author: ```suggestion
back to update things at some point---but projects _tend_ to be more one or the other.
```

The advantage of iterative development for a solo developer is noticeable but not particularly

> groundbreaking. The most noticeable difference is how quickly and smoothly you can adapt to changes
> or mistakes. An iterative approach tends to be more flexible and in many fields the [data][dora]
> shows that it helps reduce mistakes, speed up releases, and makes for safer work environments.

Author: ```suggestion
groundbreaking. The most visible difference is how quickly and smoothly you can adapt to changes or
mistakes. An iterative approach tends to be more flexible and in many fields the [data][dora] shows
that it helps reduce mistakes, speed up releases, and makes for safer work environments.
```

For games-adjacent work, the flexibility and impacts on getting our work published are probably the

> advantages independent publishers will notice the most, though the other benefits aren't _nothing_,

Author: ```suggestion
advantages independent publishers will notice the most. The other benefits aren't _nothing_,
especially for larger teams.
```

1. You're not stuck trying to cram everything into a single flow of pages. While you're still
   developing the text, you can reorder things, add reference pages, try writing focused teaching
   texts, add supporting media, post experimental ideas as blogs, and more.

As I noted [above](#digital-formats-arent-physical-formats), web editions are also a richer and more
accessible option than PDFs.

Focusing first on releasing a web edition gives me flexibility, accessibility, interactivity, and
visibility that I would have to work much harder to get with a PDF-first model, if I could get those
benefits at all.

When I talk about making web editions, I always hear three main lines of concern.

<!-- vale Microsoft.HeadingPunctuation = NO -->

### How will I get people to buy my thing if they can find it online for free?

Lucky for you, it's possible to gate your web content behind a paywall if you _really_ want
to. I actually advise folks not to do this though for several reasons:

- Your web edition _is also advertising_ for your offline/physical editions and other works.
- A web edition is a phenomenal "try before you buy" option. If your web edition is done well,

>   people are likely to want a physical copy.
> - It's constantly remarked on in developer circles that our audiences love to buy cool shit.
>   People also often complain about piracy. Producing a low-to-no-art highly interactive and

Author: ```suggestion
people are likely to want a physical copy. It's constantly remarked on in developer circles that
  our audiences love to buy cool shit.
- People also often complain about piracy. Producing a low-to-no-art highly interactive and
```

connection. Even better, PWAs can be treated like apps on mobile devices, making your work easier
to find once someone has decided they like it enough to pin it. Yes, you need to have internet
access at least once but that's _also_ true for PDFs.

If a website is made correctly, you _don't_ need a powerful computer to access and enjoy browsing
it. Especially for the types of content and interactivity we're highlighting for books, there's
_nothing_ you need to put in a web edition that should require more than 3g connectivity and a
Chromebook, phone, or tablet.

<!-- vale Microsoft.HeadingPunctuation = YES -->

## Offline

People also like reading texts on e-reader screens or printing them off at home to share with
their friends. Sometimes people just find that parsing printed text is less work for their brains.

So in addition to a web edition, I also propose and endorse creating an offline edition of your
work. For me, this actually comes in two related forms: an EPUB and a print-at-home PDF option.

### EPUB

I advocate without reservation that everyone make an EPUB for every text they're releasing in any

> sort of digital format. If you're not into a web edition or a print-at-home offline option, still
> make an EPUB. EPUBs are _widely_ supported---you can read them on any phone or tablet, in nearly any

Author: ```suggestion
sort of digital format. If you're not into a web edition or a print-at-home offline option, make an
EPUB anyway. EPUBs are _widely_ supported---you can read them on any phone or tablet, in nearly any
```

computer browser (with an add-on) and on any computer (with an app), and on e-readers.

If you're making a web edition, chances are _very good_ you're writing in Markdown and using a
static site generator which means you _already have what you need to make an EPUB_. You can use
software like [Pandoc][pandoc] or [online tools][epub-online] to convert your Markdown to an EPUB.
Unless something has gone horribly wrong, all you need to do at that point is add metadata and make
your EPUB available.

### Print-at-Home

> In addition to making an EPUB, my offline edition includes a PDF optimized for printing at home. Low
> ink usage with a layout focused on readability, it's meant to be printed on a home printer (or at a
> local print service, often co-located with shipping---check your local area).

Author: ```suggestion
In addition to making an EPUB, I suggest making a PDF with low ink usage and a layout focused on
readability that's meant to be printed on a home printer (or at a local print service, often
co-located with shipping---check your local area).
```

I've personally been leaning towards letter/A4 sized PDFs you can print double-sided, three-hole
punch, and shove in a binder. You could also do a zine or pocketmod format, whatever works for your
project.

Where the web edition focused on interactivity and taking advantage of being read on a screen, a
print-at-home edition of your work should focus on being as usable and helpful as possible once it's
printed. This is where I suggest you start spending money and/or time on illustrations, assets, and
supporting materials.

An offline edition for printing at home could include:

- paper minis - who doesn't love nasty little freaks you can print, cut, and color?
- paper terrain - print and fold for suddenly three-dimensional play spaces
- tokens - spell or condition effects, interactive or destructible items, trackers
- maps - small, large format, illustrative
- tiles - hexes, buildings in a town, a boat, dungeon sections
- quick reference sheets - rules, spells, factions, rumors, regions
- cards - to print on cardstock and cut, print directly onto index cards, or print on paper and glue
  to index cards

> - pregenerated characters - roll up quick reference, quick start, and an idea to get people going

Author: ```suggestion
- pregenerated characters - combine quick reference, quick start, and an idea to get people going
```

- handouts - letters, portraits, scene illustrations, spell books, ledgers, job boards

You're not limited to what you can afford to have professionally printed, packed, and shipped but by
your own imagination and tolerance for work (or budget/team if, like me, you're incompetent at both
layout and illustration).

> You also don't have to have everything solved or ready all at once. Unlike a physical edition people
> are going to buy and expect to show up intact, packed, and ready to go, your offline edition can
> always add more stuff and fix things. Like your web edition, you can iterate as much as you please.

Author: ```suggestion
You also don't have to have everything solved or ready all at once. Unlike a physical edition, which
people buy and expect to show up intact, packed, and ready to go, your offline edition can always
add more stuff and fix issues. Like your web edition, you can iterate as much as you please with
very little overhead.
```

### LeanPub

When it comes to selling offline editions of your work, I recommend [LeanPub][leanpub]. LeanPub has
a [category for Roleplaying Games][leanpub-rpgs] and you won't need to buy a subscription (none of
those features matter if you're making your own EPUB/PDF). LeanPub _does_ take 20% of sales

> revenue---more than Itch, less than DTRPG---but:

Author: ```suggestion
revenue---more than Itch, less than DTRPG---but LeanPub also:
```

> - they pay royalties promptly and reliably
> - have a functional search/discovery experience
> - have excellent and responsive support
> - highlight projects regularly
> - support and encourage you to sell your work elsewhere

Author: ```suggestion
- pays royalties promptly and reliably
- has a functional search/discovery experience
- has excellent and responsive support
- highlights projects regularly
- supports and encourages you to sell your work elsewhere
```

- enables you to automatically direct some or all your revenue to a charitable organization
- has a functional newsletter you can spend revenue to secure a spot in (they also highlight
  projects that _don't_ spend money)
- lets you sell multiple packages of your project at varying prices (e.g. just the text, text +
  assets, text + assets + consulting/custom content)
- enables you to set a minimum price and a suggested price and uses a price slider that _starts_ at
  the suggested price (my experience is that many people actually pay _more_ than the suggested
  price)
- supports coupons (which you can use to mimic community copies, if you want)
- has robust settings including:
  - a community edition (free copy with optionally limited content that people get in exchange for
    opting to provide their email address)
  - a sample edition (free copy with optionally limited content, no conditions)
  - the ability to temporarily unlist your book
  - provide your book in multiple languages
  - incorporate team bios
  - set a thank you message for purchases

For me, the most useful features are the automatic revenue sharing with the team and being able to

> automatically direct revenue to a charity organization. I find that this is worth the 20% cut even
> before considering the rest of the features and benefits.

Author: ```suggestion
direct revenue to a charity organization. I find that this is worth the 20% cut even before
considering the rest of the features and benefits.
```

When it comes to pricing, I'm comfortable selling my work on LeanPub at similar rates to those
people are charging for physical copies. I set the suggested price where I think it ought to be and
then fiddle with my minimum price (usually in the $8--12 range). One model I really like on LeanPub

> is to start the minimum price lower when I first release and increase it as my team adds assets and
> improves the core text. For example, I might put a book up with a $32 suggested price and raise the
> minimum $1 every month that we add new stuff until the minimum is $16.

Author: ```suggestion
is to start the price lower when I first release and increase it as my team adds assets and improves
the core text. For example, I might put a book up with a $8/$16 minimum/suggested price and raise
them $1/$2 every month that we add stuff until the price is $16/$32.
```

> Remember, you can have add-ons and packages and price those separately, too.

Author: ```suggestion
Remember, you can have add-ons packages and price those separately.
```

## Physical

I approach physical editions a little differently. I may not do a physical edition for every
project---it depends on how much interest and excitement there is in both the team and the audience.

> But when I do, I aim for a luxury option. Because I release a free web edition and an affordable
> offline edition, I don't worry about how affordable or limited my physical editions may be. Instead
> I can work with the team to manifest the best possible expression of our work in physical form.

Author: ```suggestion
When I do, I aim for a luxury option. Because I release a free web edition and an affordable offline
edition, I don't worry about how affordable or limited my physical editions may be. Instead I can
work with the team to manifest the best possible expression of our work in physical form.
```
